What is this Core Data thing?
So we tried to come up with
a one-sentence description
for what is Core Data.
And it actually took my team a
little bit of time to come up
with something that's succinct,
not really really long,
end up with arguments about
is persistency really a word?
But this is what we ended up with:
model-driven object graph management
and persistency framework.
Exactly.
We actually ended up,
we asked a couple people this question,
what is Core Data?
And usually when we give a response,
we get one of two reactions.
We either got the okay nod,
or we got the 90-minute whiteboard,
scratch paper, textbook,
all kinds of big long
conversations version.
That's not actually because
Core Data is complicated.
How many of you people
have read the docs?
Come on, lie to me, raise your hands.
Okay, if you've read the docs,
you'll see that our
API is relatively small.
It's somewhat minimal for
working with this problem set.
So the conversations take a while,
not because Core Data is complicated,
but the problem space is complicated.
Dealing with all the different
issues of data management,
persistency, undo, redo,
and all sorts of stuff
is pretty complicated.
And a lot of times you'll be working
on your application and realize,
I didn't really know this
was going to be a problem.
The fact is that Core Data provides
solutions for a lot of
these different problems.
So usually when you're
working with Core Data,
it takes some time to
explore the problem.
But if you're working with Core Data,
it's going to be a lot of fun.
So let's take a look at some
applications that are in
Mac OS X that use Core Data as kind
of a sample of what's possible.
So if you were to log into
Mac OS X and start up an application,
the first thing you might see
is something called Aperture.
Aperture is Apple's leading
photographic management application.
And this is a behemoth.
This is a pro app.
And much like a pro apps,
this is one that's adopted
Core Data exclusively for all of
its data management applications.
This is an application that
deals not just with hundreds
of thousands of photos,
but with potentially hundreds of pieces
of metadata for every single photo,
hundreds of pieces of keywords,
all sorts of kind of different
data for this application.
This application has high data,
but also has low latency requirements.
And because it has lots of
data and lots of complex data,
they want complex queries.
They want to be able to funnel it
down to keep their working set very,
very small.
And they can do that with Core Data.
They're actually able to use it as well
for something we call data replication.
Which is actually saving off
pieces of their data so that
any time something happens,
they can reconstruct their project.
And Core Data makes that
really easy for them to do.
But it's not just about the big apps.
Let's take a look at a couple
of their small applications.
AddressBook and iCal.
And you might be thinking,
I've seen these applications before.
I didn't know they were using Core Data.
In Leopard, they are.
And they're not actually interesting
for their application space,
but because they're both frameworks.
Both AddressBook and iCal have adopted
Core Data for their persistency.
And they're able to use it in
Leopard for framework implementation.
And this is actually interesting
for a number of reasons.
The first is when you
think about AddressBook,
you think about an API that's
been around for a while.
So in order for them to adopt Core Data,
they needed to find a way to fit it
into existing API to make sure that
customers didn't have to change.
And they were able to
do that very easily.
They also had a legacy schema that
they needed to pull over and to put
into Core Data to make this work.
And that's possible too.
iCal is in a little different situation.
They have their calendar store framework
now that they're publishing in Leopard.
They don't actually have an
existing API to worry about,
but they do have file formats.
If you look in the ICS file,
there's the V-Cal standard in there that
they need to maintain for compatibility.
And Core Data makes that possible.
But what's most interesting about these
two is not that they're frameworks,
but also that they have
multi-process access.
They have high concurrency needs.
You think about applications,
just about every application uses one of
these frameworks in one way or the other.
Whether it's the new AddressBook or
the new iCal functionality.
So these people have really
strong requirements for iCal.
They have high requirements for lots
of people accessing the same framework
and dealing with multiple access.
And Core Data provides
a solution for them.
Talking about other apps that
you might think that might
not be able to use Core Data,
you think Mail.
Well, okay.
Mail has a very long
tradition of having a very,
very good schema for
their data management.
And frankly,
they don't really need Core Data.
Core Data works,
or their existing schema works
great for what they have.
But they have some auxiliary data needs.
Storing the pop message counts and
tracking what you've downloaded.
That's something that they
had to do themselves and
realized there's a solution.
It's Core Data.
So you don't need to use it for the
entire breadth of your application.
You can use it just for a small piece.
They're also something that
has just a moderate data set.
You don't need something large.
It's just a small amount of
data that you can still get a
lot of benefit from Core Data.
How many of you people in here
have actually done AppleScript?
Currently do AppleScript?
Ah, quite a few.
How many of you have used System Events?
Not many.
There's actually a functionality that we
produced in Tiger called System Events.
And in there is something
called Database Events.
The AppleScript team put
together a background process,
no UI at all, to allow people to use
databases in AppleScript.
And they were able to use Core Data as
a way to develop a generic schema
backend so that you could store
lots of different data types and
use it seamlessly with AppleScript.
So it's an example of something
that doesn't have a lot of
application logic in it.
It's just something that manages data.
It has no UI for it.
It's just something that's
done by AppleScript.
But that gets a lot of benefit
from something like Core Data.
Then we talk about something like Xcode.
And I put Xcode in a category of its own,
and I'm going to call
it the kitchen sink.
And this is because they have a lot of
different needs for data management,
and they're all very, very different.
For example, the documentation window is
now using Core Data for its
API and its full-text searches.
We're also using Core Data-- we eat our
own dog food-- as our management for--
our management for all
of our design models.
So the migration model is done using
the persistent document implementation.
And Xcode is also very unique in
that it's using Core Data underlying
for managing how their modules are
related to one another and what
kind of functionality they provide.
It has really nothing to do with
the project file or the source
code file or anything else,
but it's a really good way to
structure how the modules are
related to one another and how
they all fit in at runtime.
So you don't necessarily need to
have large data needs or a specific
data set in order to use Core Data.
You can use it in some
very interesting ways.
So after looking at all
these different examples,
you still might be thinking, okay,
I'm still not sure.
Is Core Data right for me or not?
So let's take a look at that.
Let's go back to our original definition,
this one that you all kind of laughed at,
and let's break it down into
some more fundamental pieces.
So let's break it down into four
or five different areas that we'll
go into a little more detail.
So the first one is modeling.
It's defining a structure for your data.
And this might be something
you're sitting there thinking,
"You know,
I don't really need this right now.
I've got all my classes,
I've got all my data management,
this is not really important to
me." This is actually something
that you probably don't need,
but it's probably something you want,
whether you realize it or not.
This is something where defining
the way your data is structured
gives you the ability to do things
like provide default values,
provide validation and
constraints to say,
"My data has to exist this way."
It may not seem like a lot,
but it becomes very,
very useful when dealing
with user interface and user
workflow kind of things.
But what's further important is by
defining a structure of your data,
by modeling your data,
you get really large benefits from
like versioning and migration.
What does it mean to have this version
of my application and this version?
What changed?
By having a structure of your data,
you can model your data.
By having a defined schema,
you can actually see and the
framework might actually help you
deal with some of those things.
Object Graph Management is
probably what you guys think of
as the hallmark of a framework,
I guess.
This is something where this is really
the nuts and bolts or the details
of using a persistence framework.
And there's a lot of things we do:
object manipulation, more validation,
all those kinds of things.
But I would actually be willing to bet
that for the second bullet up there,
for undo and redo,
Core Data is absolutely worth it,
if for no other reason.
We've all been there.
We've all had an application
where you've started up and
you did something and you went,
"Ooh,
that wasn't right." And we all do it.
We all look down and see
Command-Z and you're like,
"I'm not really sure if that's
going to work." But you tried
anyway and you do and you're like,
"Ah, that didn't happen."
That's just not right.
Because undo should work.
It's a fundamental thing,
but we all know it's very,
very difficult to do and to get it right.
What does it mean to roll back changes?
What about after saves?
And to do all those things.
But if every application
had undo for free,
I think we'd all be a little
more whimsical with things
that we do inside our apps.
But there's also things like
dealing with... There's things like
dealing with references and inverse
relationships and delete rules.
What happens if I delete
this other thing?
Should that go away?
These are all things that you
shouldn't have to worry about.
You should really be thinking about
how your application is structured,
how the data is related to one another,
and getting on with the
core of your application.
Structured access is something
that I think is very important.
We all have probably had large data
files of some kind and realized,
I need to find something,
I need to get into something.
You go to your top shelf and you pull
off your dusty CS manual and you're
flipping through to try to figure
out what's the best way to sort this?
What's the best algorithm to find this?
You shouldn't have to do that.
There should be a really nice
structured way of defining your queries.
In fact,
it would be even better if you could
define queries in a templatized way that
you could come back to later and say,
this is my query,
just apply it over and over again.
Things like filtering and sorting.
Again,
you shouldn't have to worry about this.
There should be a
structured way to do this.
And Core Data,
along with the Foundation Framework,
provides that for you.
Data persistency is probably
the thing that you think
of as one of the hallmarks,
the foundations.
I need to load my data,
I need to save my data,
validate that it looks right.
These are all things
that are very important.
But what about formats?
Do you have options to save your
files out in different formats?
Could it be one?
Could it move to another?
Could it start from
one and become another?
What about different options
like read-write capability?
Can you mark things as read-only and
not have to worry about it through
any other piece of your application?
These are little nuanced details
that the framework also provides.
But I also think that one of the really
important things are opt-in initiatives.
You guys are here all week to
find out about the brand new
things that are in Leopard and all
the other different frameworks.
And these are things that are
really fundamental to the way
you do things or opportunities
that you'll have later that,
again, you guys really shouldn't
have to worry about.
Things like key-value coding
and key-value observation,
making sure that your objects play nicely
with Cocoa bindings and interfaces.
But what about the new things
that we've heard about this week?
The new 64-bit stuff,
the garbage collection, property support.
These are all things that a framework
really should be able to do.
And I think that's a
really important thing.
These are all things that a framework
really should provide for you.
So again, you don't have to worry
about these little details.
You can just get on with the
core of your application.
And these are things that
Core Data does for you as well.
So we've heard a lot
about what Core Data is,
and we have a moment of honesty here.
Core Data is not for everyone.
Sometimes, honestly,
Core Data is not an option.
And there are three specific
instances that we should cover,
just to be completely on the up and up.
The first is if you can't
link the Foundation Framework.
We do a lot with the
Foundation Framework,
both with key value coding,
key value observing,
all sorts of different
stuff with Objective-C.
If you're not able to link Foundation,
unfortunately Core Data is
not going to be right for you.
The second is if you require what we
call an infinitely malleable schema.
If you have an application where
users need to be able to provide
the most flexible schema possible,
or they need to be able to make changes,
add their own properties,
change relationships at runtime,
do all sorts of different things.
If you can't define that in a
way that's kind of abstracted,
Core Data is unfortunately
not going to be right either.
We like to have a very
well defined schema,
because we make a lot of our
functionality based on the
fact that that doesn't change.
So if you need an malleable schema,
unfortunately Core Data is
not going to be right for you
And the last one,
and I know this might be
near and dear to some of you,
but if you need true client-server
access at this point in time,
Core Data is not going to
be the solution for you.
Now that's not to say that you can't
provide an application that does
some kind of distributed notification
stuff and all access the same store,
but if you need something that's
truly client-server oriented,
Core Data is not going to
be the solution for you.
So we covered what Core Data is
and some of the things it's not.
For the rest of this presentation
we're going to go through two
of the more fundamental pieces:
the modeling and persistence side,
the object graph management side,
and then for all of you who
are familiar with Core Data,
we're going to go through the
new features that we have a
lot of other sessions this
week to cover in more detail.
So let's get on to
modeling and persistence.
Modeling is, as we said before,
it's kind of the formalization
of your application's data model.
And it defines two
major functional things.
It defines the type and
structure of your data,
and it defines the interrelationships
between pieces of data.
Now,
a model for us has a major component,
which are entities.
And entities, in turn, have properties,
and properties can be either
attributes or relationships.
So if you look at the diagram over here,
you'll see that we have
recipe and we have chef.
Recipe and chef are both entities.
They both have properties.
The recipe has attributes like name,
cuisine, and directions.
So does the chef.
Different kinds of attributes.
And they also have relationships.
So you can see that
recipe is related to chef.
Recipe has a single chef, in this case.
And a chef has many recipes.
So we've created two entities,
some properties,
and some relationships between them.
This defines the structure of our data.
This defines how our data is structured.
is going to look at runtime.
Now actually using that data at runtime,
we're going to have objects.
So manage objects are the data workhorse.
These are the things
that contain the values.
They also contain the
relationships to other objects.
These are the things on which we've
implemented key value coding and key
value observing to do a lot of the things
that you need to get your work done.
And this is going to be your
main element of subclassing.
When you want to go and add custom
logic or add custom functionality,
extend some attributes,
do some interesting things
with the relationship,
this is going to be your unit of work.
So this is kind of the noun for most
of Core Data is the managed object.
Now it's really important to be clear,
though, what's the difference between
an entity versus objects?
Because a lot of people
use these interchangeably,
and it can cause some confusion.
So consider that entities
are the metadata.
They're the structure behind
things and how things are laid out,
while the managed objects are the actual
data implementation and representation.
Managed objects refer to a single entity.
So when you have a managed object,
it is only one kind of entity.
But to be a little bit more clear,
I have a chart here that's very simple.
An entity description is to a managed
object as a class is to an s object.
Everybody read that carefully.
So an entity description,
or actually an easier way to
say it is a managed object is an
instance of an entity description.
Is everyone clear on that?
Come on.
Thank you.
All right.
Once you have data,
we have stores to put them in,
you want to put them somewhere.
And we have different kinds
of stores that have different
kind of characteristics.
Different stores are better
for different things.
So you see we have four
different store options.
We have two atomic stores,
our XML and our binary store.
By atomic store,
we mean they need to be read in all
at once and written out all at once.
We also have our SQL store,
which has different
performance characteristics,
because we don't need
to read in all the data.
So you need to pick and choose
a store that's right for you,
and we have lots of different options.
That's kind of the basic of
the persistency of the models,
stores, and stuff like that.
For all of you who have
really read the documentation,
there's actually some hidden
features in there that,
well, they're not really hidden,
but they're sometimes overlooked
features that we really wanted to cover
to get the most out of Core Data for
all the times that you use it.
The first feature we want to
cover is transient properties.
How many of you have used
transient properties?
Not many.
So the idea of a transient
property is something that's
managed just like everything else,
but it's not persisted.
And you might be thinking, "Well,
why would I ever want to do
that?" Consider something
like your own custom class,
or something like an NSColor.
We don't have a native
data type for that.
I can't just go into my model and say,
"Oh, this is a color." Now,
we do have a binary attribute
that would allow you to serialize
it out as an archive or something
like that and read it back in.
That's code that you have to write,
but it's kind of a pain to think of,
"Every time I deal with a color,
it's not really a color.
It's a data blob,
and I need to convert it back and forth."
A transient property gives you the
ability to define something that says,
"It is this type.
Add a little code behind it
that does the transformation,
and it looks just like
any other attribute.
It feels like any other attribute,
but you don't have to worry about
actually figuring out some way to save
a color natively as its actual format."
But while most people think
of transients as properties,
there's also the other side which
is a transient relationship,
which is also a little bit heady,
but it's actually very, very interesting.
A transient relationship is
one that exists at runtime,
but that's not persisted.
Now, why would you want to
do something like this?
Consider if you have two
stores of data with two objects
that are actually related.
Well, they're in two separate stores.
I can't actually bind them together
in a way that's going to be
meaningful if I just open one store.
I can't create a hard relationship.
But if I could create a transient
relationship such that when both stores
are opened and that relationship exists,
so I could ask one object
for the other or vice versa,
and it works just like
any other relationship,
it provides a really powerful way to do
what we call cross-store relationships,
or bind two schemas,
or take two graphs and connect
them in a way that really doesn't
exist in a persisted world,
but really needs to
exist in your runtime.
So transient properties can be very,
very useful.
But to be honest, you don't actually need
to model all of your data.
A lot of people have said, "Well,
I've got all these instance
variables and stuff like that.
What do I do with them?" In some cases,
you do nothing with them.
If your properties are not modeled,
if they don't exist in
one of our data models,
Core Data ignores them.
They're not managed at all.
Now, of course,
you need to be careful when you do this,
because when we say that they're ignored,
we really mean it.
There's no undo, there's no redo,
there's no validation, there's nothing.
But it provides a very easy way for you
to take a schema that already exists and
start to move it to use managed objects,
start to use properties and use the
attributes and relationships over time,
but not have to move it all at once.
So you can actually have unmodeled data.
Another thing about the modeling tools it
provides is the fetch request templates.
This is kind of the templatized
queries that I was mentioning before.
And it provides a way to create
pre-canned requests that you
can refer to by name at runtime,
and provide your own
variables for replacement.
This may not seem to be very useful,
except that it includes a really easy to
use visual development for your queries.
It's all sorts of nesting,
ands and ors and
everything else like that.
And when you have a
really complicated query,
something that takes a lot of
details to look at and figure
out how to get it just right,
this becomes a really useful
tool for creating those.
And again,
you can just go ahead and use the dollar
sign notation to provide variables,
and then at runtime you say,
"This is my query,
these are my variables,
go and perform this query."
So it makes it really,
really easy to create complex
queries and refer to them later.
When creating models,
there's the whole concept of
combining and targeting models.
The Core Data runtime likes to
have one model to work from.
Now for us,
models are just collections of entities.
They're really no more
sophisticated than that.
So you can take two models,
and with different pieces of API,
you can merge them together.
It effectively just puts all
the entities into one model,
and the result looks just like any other,
as if you had created it yourself.
So this becomes a really easy way to
take two separate and distinct things,
and to put them all into one.
But what's probably a hidden feature
is something we call configurations,
which is the ability to take a model and
define collections of entities by name,
and say, "This is a collection,
and this is a collection," and
then to use those collections
to target specific stores.
Now, why you might want to do that is,
consider you may have a store that says,
"Well, my application data is over here,
and my user data is over here,
and I want to make sure that
it's actually split up that way.
I want to make sure that the data
doesn't actually get mixed up,
or go to the wrong place." Or you
may have an application that says,
"Well, I have all sorts of data,
but depending on the type
of user that logs in,
I really don't want to give them
access to a certain set of entities."
So by using configurations,
you can define specific
collections of entities,
either targeted to a specific store,
or they're only accessible
to the application.
So it's a very handy feature.
You can do this with the API,
and you can also define
them in the modeling tools.
Talking about picking specific tours and
stores and targeting specific stores,
we listed the in-memory
store as one of our options,
and it's kind of the unsung hero.
Having an in-memory store is an
exceptionally useful thing to do when,
well, you want to use managed objects,
but you don't want to save them.
So reasons you might want to do this are,
for example,
you have your own file format,
and you just want to read in,
do some managed object stuff,
but you don't want to
actually save it out.
But you still want to use managed
objects to work with them.
As we talked about before,
if you have multiple stores,
you may actually want to use
an in-memory store to represent
things that go across them,
or relationships that go across them,
that again don't exist at runtime,
or things that are calculated.
It's a really easy way to get all
the same benefits of Core Data,
but not have to worry about persistence
or where the information goes to.
But we've talked a lot
about having lots of stores,
and this is an important
point to point out,
that you can use as many as you want.
By default,
Core Data's API works across all the
stores that are added to our coordinator.
So all of your fetches work
across all of your stores.
When you create new objects,
we find the right store for it,
figuring out which stores
can support which entities,
or where it's related to
and where it has to go.
And it makes it really easy to have
lots of different pieces of data in your
application with many different backings.
Now it's kind of interesting to think
about the fact that there's two ways
you could really structure this.
You could do something like iTunes,
where every iTunes library has
the same kind of information.
We all have songs and
playlists in the same manner.
So every store has the same schema,
and we just add multiple
stores so you can look at it.
But again,
you may want to structure it so
that some data lives in one store,
and some data lives in another.
And it all just works with Core Data.
You really don't have to think
about how many stores you have,
or where it needs to go,
unless that's really important to you.
So it provides a really good
flexible way to structure where
your data comes and goes to.
But of course you don't
always have to pick one.
As we said before,
we have lots of different store options,
and the framework is
mostly store agnostic.
When you start with one
store and end with another,
the framework just works.
Your application logic just works,
regardless of what kind
of store you're saving to.
And it makes it really easy to,
for example, start with the XML store
at development time,
so that you can open up your
store and look at the content,
figure out,
did I really save that correctly?
Is it the value I was really expecting?
And then later convert it to the
SQL store to get all the benefits
of performance and only pulling
in the data set that you need.
And I'm not joking,
it is really one piece of code,
one line of code to migrate a
store from one version to another.
So just because you start
with one doesn't mean you
need to end with that one.
And finally, NS Persistent Document.
For all you people who've had to
write document-based applications,
there's the read from URL,
write from URL.
There's all the different pieces
of API you need to implement
in order to figure out where
your data comes and goes to.
We've provided a subclass,
NS Persistent Document,
that handles that for you.
It provides all of the
basic core data stack,
all the basic stuff that we
need to go ahead and pull in
your data and persist your data,
and all you really need to
do is provide a model file.
Just need to tell us what the structure
of your data looks like and get on
with developing your application.
And it's a really, really easy way to get
started with core data.
So actually,
let's go ahead and show you a
demonstration of that and take
a look at what that looks like.
I'm going to go into Xcode here,
and I'm just going to go ahead
and create a brand new project.
And I'm going to go ahead and
select the Core Data document-based
application here,
and give it a name.
We'll call this Xcode.
Let's call it Photos 2006.
And I'm just going to go ahead
and create my application.
And there are a couple
pieces of interesting
information in my project here.
There's a model it
created for me by default.
It added some classes for me.
There's my document class,
and it added some resources for me.
I can show you the code that it
put in for your document class,
and as you can see, it's minimal.
And that's mostly because
of the fact that this is a
persistent document subclass.
And all the nitty-gritty details about
being a persistent document and figuring
out where the data comes from and goes
to is all in the persistent document.
So it's not code you have to worry about.
Let's go and take a
look at the data model.
This is the data modeling tool,
where you're going to go ahead
and create your data models.
And I'll up the resolution here so
you guys in the back can see it.
And we just want to go
ahead and create a model,
create something to structure our data,
and allow us to create
something on top of it.
So I'm going to click the
little plus button here,
and it's going to add an entity.
And I'm going to call this photo.
We're going to replicate the Photo class
that you probably saw yesterday in the
keynote where we had the grid view and
saw different information about Photo.
So here's my Photo entity.
I'm going to use a little
keyboard shortcut here to
quickly add three attributes.
So you can see my attributes here,
and I can go ahead and rename them.
We're going to want a
Data attribute to store the
actual binary data for our Photo.
We're going to go ahead and
add a rating so that we can
rate how we like the Photos.
And we'll give each Photo a name.
So I've defined three
properties and I've named them.
But I need to go ahead and
actually define the types behind
these different attributes.
So for the Data attribute,
I'm going to go up on the pop-up here
and select Binary Data and set that.
I'm going to go and select the name.
I'm going to do the same thing.
Select the string.
And you'll note that the inspector on the
right gives me some different options.
I can provide a min and
a max length for string.
I can provide a regular
expression for validation.
But I can also define a default value.
In this case, we'll define Untitled as
the default value for all
of our names for our Photos.
And I can also define a rating.
And we'll make this an integer.
And much in the same way,
I can define some constraints.
We'll say our ratings are from 0 to 5,
and every Photo has a default value of 2.
So I've just defined an entity
with a couple attributes.
Now, let's do something a
little more interesting.
We can add another entity here,
and we'll call this Person.
And we could go ahead and
again add a couple attributes.
Maybe this is First Name and Last Name.
The modeling tool is really
good about providing you
things like multiple selection,
so I can select both of those
and say they're both strings.
So now I have person and photos,
and I want to relate them in some way.
I can actually pull
down here at the bottom,
and there's a little tool
for creating relationships,
and really all it's going to take is
for me to drag from one to the other.
It's going to create a line,
and when I let go,
you'll see it added the
relationship to the person entity.
And I can come over here and
call this relationship photos,
so that I can ask every person
object for its list of photos
and get the actual photo.
Of course,
we note that here that this little
arrow has only got one little end to it.
I really want to click
the too many relationship,
because a person should
really have many photos.
Well, let's actually create
the inverse relationship.
What about going from
a photo to a person?
I can just drag backwards,
and you'll see that, again,
it creates the relationship for me.
And I could name this
maybe "Photographer."
and you'll see that now a photo has
a 2-1 relationship to a photographer,
but there's also this nice little
pop-up here called an inverse,
and that functionally these
relationships are an inverse.
If I go from a person to a photo,
going backwards from the photo to the
person is really kind of the inverse.
So by defining those as an inverse,
you'll see that my
model is now structured,
that person and photo are related,
but it collapses those relationships
into one to help you think about
how your data is structured.
So there we go.
Not too difficult to define a model.
Let's do something interesting with it.
So in as much as we want to
talk about how you can use
Core Data in your applications,
I think it's also interesting
to talk about how Core Data is
integrated into the development tools.
We take this very seriously and
provide the fact that because
Core Data is so easy to use,
by making it more integrated,
by making it a better part of
the development experience,
you guys can get a lot more work done.
So I'm going to go into
my document class here,
and you'll see it was brought
up in Interface Builder.
And I want to add
something interesting here.
So let's go ahead and just
delete this item here.
And how many of you have seen the
Interface Builder demo so far,
seen the new library?
You like it?
Come on, do you like it?
Thank you.
All right, so in the library now you'll
find a new Core Data item.
So you see this little item here,
I'm going to drag it into
my window and drop it.
And what this is going to do is
it's going to go and ask Xcode,
"Okay, what's the project for this nib?"
and show me all its data models.
So there are the two
entities I just created,
photo and person.
So I'm going to go
ahead and select photo,
and it's going to bring up this nice
little window just to show me the kinds
of interfaces it can help me create.
Now this is just going to go
ahead and lay some widgets out
for me and set up some bindings.
It's not going to do anything magical,
it's just going to take care of a little
bit of minutiae details that it would
have taken me a while to do on my own.
So I can go ahead and pick different
checkboxes here to see a live
preview of what it's going to create,
and I want it to create the search fields
and the table views and everything else.
And I can actually pick and
choose which pieces of information
I can put into my interface.
And at this point in time
I really don't want to deal with
the photographer information,
I just want to deal with the photos.
So we'll click finish,
and there's my interface.
And you'll note that if I look
over here in my document window,
you'll see that it added
an array controller for me.
And you'll note that it set up the
binding to the manage object context.
And the context is on the files owner,
which is the persistent document.
So you see it's just binding up
things that have existed for me,
things that it's taken advantage
of that exist in the classes
like the persistent document.
So really at this point
there's nothing I need to do.
I'm just going to go
ahead and save my nib,
and I'm going to go ahead and
create a new interface builder.
And I'm going to go ahead and
There's a great new feature
of Interface Builder,
build and go in Xcode.
So I'm not going to
leave Interface Builder,
I'm just going to click the button.
You'll see that the little,
you can see it over there,
it's going to precompile and go ahead,
build it,
So here's my application.
Let's go ahead and do
something with this.
I have a nice little folder of photos
here that I just want to go ahead
and now that I've defined a model,
let's put stuff into the store for this.
So we can go ahead and
just add a new record,
and you see that there
are my default values,
the rating of 2 and the untitled.
So I can drag in the beach,
and we'll put that in.
We'll call it beach.
And I'm a city guy,
so we'll make that a 4 out of 5.
I'm more of a...
Anyone from Chicago here?
Excellent.
So I'm more of a city guy,
so we'll put in city here.
I know it's not a picture of Chicago,
but we'll give that a five.
And I could just go ahead
and add more pictures.
I'm just dragging the image
into the views that Interface
Builder created for me.
We'll call this fall.
We'll give it a rating of four,
because I like the colors.
And we'll drag in the tower.
And I'm scared of heights,
so we're going to leave that as two.
So all I've done is used all the
bindings that were set up for
me in the persistent document,
and it's now put this into my graph.
And all I'm going to do is hit Save,
and it's going to give me a
list of places I can save that.
I'll pick my desktop.
And they're my format options.
These are the store options that were
provided for you by the persistent
document set up in the project template.
And so I'm just going to
pick the binary store,
and we'll just call this demo.
And if we look at the desktop,
there's the store file.
Just to prove to you that it's real,
I'm going to close that.
We'll go and reopen it.
And there it is.
There's my store file.
Again, I can go through and things
like multiple selection,
I can go ahead and change the
ratings on things like that.
I could go ahead and change
them to something different.
Actually, I can go ahead and save it.
Now watch, I'll go ahead and change
all the way back to two,
maybe change this one back to one,
and realize, you know,
this is not really what I want.
Let's just hit Command-Z and
undo all the way past the save.
And it all just works.
So oh, wait.
Oh, oh.
But wait, there's more.
So that's interesting.
That's getting data
into your application.
Let's do something a little bit more,
well, Apple-like.
So let's go back into the interface here.
Actually, let's quit the app first.
No, really, I said quit.
And go back into the app here,
delete the interface,
and let's actually just run
that little assistant again,
and we're going to pick the photos.
And this time I'm actually
going to do the grid view,
that nice little thing you saw yesterday.
There's a little preview
of the grid view,
and we'll add a little
search field at the bottom.
And in this case,
all I really want is the data
and the rating for the photo.
We won't worry about the
other details for right now.
And we'll say Finish.
And now here's the grid view interface.
In this case, it doesn't have the black
background it had yesterday.
It's just transparent.
But you can see that it also
added this other little view here.
And the view is the one that's
going to be replicated over
and over again inside the grid.
And just to show you that it's real,
I can click on this here,
and we'll see that it was set
up the binding for me to the
represented object dot data.
So that's going to be the
managed object for the photo,
and it's going to use the data attribute.
I can actually go ahead and
come down here to the tool tip,
and we'll make the tool
tip for this the name.
And we'll say, OK,
this is the name of the photo.
So as you go over, you can see the name.
We can go ahead and change
different attributes of IB.
This is all just real stuff.
Now, rating-- text is boring.
So we can go and see that
this is still bound to,
again, represented object dot rating.
So let's just go ahead and delete
this over here from the view.
And let's go and do something
a little more interesting.
Let's take a-- oh,
let's take a level indicator.
Doesn't make any sense.
But it actually does when you note
that it has a rating property.
So I can go ahead and change the
max-- set the min and max value to the
same thing that we had in our model.
Set the default value right now
to 5 so that I can easily size
it and get it fitting right here.
We need to make sure that it's
structured correctly so that it
fits at the bottom of my view.
So we'll set our springs
and struts correctly.
And we also need to make sure
that it's bound correctly.
And I need to remember that it's bound
to the layout item and the rating.
So there you go.
Some simple changes.
IB is going to make sure
that I wanted to save this.
So we'll go ahead and save that.
And now let's just go ahead
and run the application again.
Don't panic.
It's just the default
document that comes up.
We'll go back and open the demo.
And there are my images now with nice
little ratings and nice little pictures.
Not a single line of code.
Now, that's not to say that any of
you will write a completely
codeless application and ship it.
If you do, call me first.
But it shows you that it's really,
really easy to go ahead
and create a data model,
create an application,
or create an interface to go ahead
and see what your data looks like,
try out some different things,
and wait till later to figure out,
all right, now I've got to figure out,
how do I sort this?
How do I figure out how
to rearrange the objects?
I want the different sizes.
I want different widgets.
It just provides you a really easy way
to not even think about the fact that
you have data and data management needs
until it's really important to you.
So a really, really easy example of using
Core Data to write applications.
So now what I'd like to do is turn
the presentation over to Ben Trumbull,
senior engineer and
architect on Core Data,
to talk more about object
graph management and some of
the new features in Core Data.
Good evening everyone, I'm Ben Trumbull,
and thank you Matt.
Alright, so I'm going to first talk
about object graph management,
the next section that Matt outlined
for you at the beginning.
And what exactly is an object graph?
It's an excellent question,
I get it all the time,
I really don't know other than
what someone before me told me.
And a bunch of graph objects
all related to each other,
separate clusters,
and they're basically all
edited at the same time,
so it's a single scope.
In which you're working with your data.
So all of these graphs that
we manage are controlled by a
single managed object context.
So a separate graph would have
multiple different contexts,
one for each graph.
And the context performs
all the change tracking,
the undo, the fetching,
a lot of the verbs.
and as I mentioned the relationships
between your data are what's really
important for creating this graph.
So as Matt showed you
in the modeling tool,
we have inverses between objects,
objects have delete rules that
get applied when you delete them,
and changes cascade throughout the graph.
So the context is providing
all this change tracking.
And for you,
we're built on top of key value
observing and NS Notification Center.
So a lot of that is how we're all
providing these features to you.
And the context provides a
list for you of inserted,
updated, and deleted objects,
as well as when it saves.
And we flush out those changes,
and we maintain those inverses.
Matt might give you a little
demo of the undo/redo support.
So we provide complete
support based on the model.
Transient properties and all
the persistent properties
get undo and redo for free.
We're built on top of the
foundation NSUndoManager,
so there isn't really
any super magic in there.
If you want, you can go to a context and
you can get its undo manager,
and you can call all of the
foundation methods on it,
so you can set a limit to
the number of items to undo,
or you can turn off grouping by events,
or you can set the undo manager to nil
to turn off undo management entirely.
Matt kind of stole my thunder
there with undo/redo cross saves.
So, in addition,
at the same level here at
the object graph management,
we provide validation.
So how to validate is in the model,
and in the modeling tool you can
specify rules like whether or
not a relationship is allowed to
have a certain number of items,
if there's a mandatory
minimum or a limit,
whether or not a property is optional.
So if it's optional,
it might be set to nil.
If it's not optional,
then you must give it a value.
It could be a default value.
But when to validate
is done by the context,
and this is done at save time.
So we'll basically validate all
the objects before we push the
save to the database itself.
And there are a bunch of hooks there for
custom validation that you can apply,
validate for insert, validate for save.
And key value coding has its own set
of callbacks that you can also provide,
so validate name error,
validate person error.
Validate person or photographer
error in the previous example.
I keep coming back to this
Managed Object Context.
It's your primary access
point in Core Data.
It's the place where you're
going to find most of the verbs,
most of the actions that you apply
to Managed Objects will be methods
on the Managed Object Context.
And it's the central observer,
the spider in the web,
that is basically reacting to all the
changes that you make to your objects.
And each one is its own context,
its own isolated scope,
so it's a scratch pad.
So you can have multiple of them,
you can have different changes.
So you might have one context for, say,
an inspector,
and another context for the main view,
and they can track changes separately.
And that lets you save some,
maybe you undo others,
but you don't have to
commingle all those edits.
The notifications are a great way for
you to add custom code in reaction
to what Core Data is doing if you
don't find that there's a delegate
method that does what you want.
A lot of people have done some
really interesting things,
building on top of the
NS notifications that we post.
The contexts of posting these
notifications about all the things that
happen at the end of every user event,
as well as after a save.
Some cool things you can do is
use the Distributor Notification
Center to repost those to other apps.
The managed objects themselves provide
KVO notifications at a fine-grained
level for every single property change.
Another thing to note
is that Cocoa Bindings,
the integration with Core Data,
a lot of what Matt demoed to you,
is all built on top of
this same mechanism.
The communication between Core Data and
Cocoa Bindings is really the same
set of mechanisms available to you.
for you.
So it's built on top of the notification
center and key value observing.
So sort of a reprise of the
overlooked features here,
now at the object graph layer.
The first is batch faulting.
Basically, one thing that comes up a lot
on some of the mailing lists,
a lot of questions people have,
is we tell them that the SQLite
store is the most scalable store.
And so they decide that
their app has a lot of data,
for whatever that means,
and they switch over,
and then it runs slower than it did with,
say, the XML store.
Never mind that when you write
out XML it's huge compared
to a nice little database.
And part of what's going on is
Core Data is trying to be lazy
to keep memory pressure down,
and we have this faulting mechanism
that only pulls in the objects
that you're actually using.
So if you ask for an
object one at a time,
we're going to have to go and fulfill
all those values one at a time.
And performing a fetch from the
database is a lot like unbuffered I.O.
You want to have a nice big chunk,
not so big that you waste memory,
but not so small that you keep
getting hit by the overhead.
So it's really easy to do this.
You can set up a predicate.
That's self in,
and you give it a var arg,
and you bind that up to an NSArray of
object IDs or managed objects,
and we'll grab all of those objects.
They don't have to have any
particular relationship to each other.
You just identify them that way.
And that's a good way to
get much better performance.
Something else is all the
object IDs we provide are sort
of opaque identifiers for every
object in the persistent stores,
and these objects
provide a URI reference.
So you can ask them for
a textual representation,
which is an NSURL,
and you can pass that out
to another application.
You can put it on the pasteboard.
There are lots of things you
can do once you have a nice
URL format for your identifiers.
Now, they're only useful after
the object's been saved,
because until it's been saved,
it's a temporary reference.
But once you have saved it,
whenever you get that textual
URI representation back,
you can give it to the persistent
store coordinator and get
back your original object ID.
So another thing that Address
Book and iCal are now making use of in
Leopard is the multi-process access.
So the SQLite store supports
multi-process access on file systems
that correctly implement file locking.
So you'll have to check what version
of NFS your file server is running.
But on HFS Plus and AFP you can get
multiple readers and multiple writers,
and conflicts are handled at
this layer by the managed object
context when it does the saving.
It basically realizes that it's not
going to be able to save the data.
is that someone's edited
things out from underneath you.
And as part of that,
we have merge policies,
which you can set per context,
which tell Core Data what you want
to do after it detects a conflict.
So we're tracking revisions in
the database to all the objects.
And at that point,
we can tell whether or not a different
process has changed the object,
or even different threads.
Or as I mentioned,
you can have multiple contexts,
so an inspector window and a main window,
and they can have different changes.
We can tell even if it's
a single thread that,
say, the inspector window has
changed something that the
main window hasn't saved.
So we provide for you four
automated recovery options,
so you don't even have to necessarily
think about it if you decide that
you want last writer to always win,
or the first writer to win and the
last writer to be forced to roll back,
or whatever.
And you can use the default policy,
which will give you a user info
dictionary on the NSError that has all
the information you need to do whatever
you would like to resolve that conflict.
And then you just save again.
So some new features in
Core Data I'm very excited about.
I hope many of you,
since a lot of you have
started playing with Core Data,
will be interested in these.
And the first is the schema evolution,
so schema migration.
This is the single most requested feature
of Core Data after Tiger Shift was
done a version of their app or
even just a beta of their app.
And you want to change your model,
add a new attribute to an entity,
something like that, really simple stuff.
And at that point,
Core Data wouldn't open
up older database files.
So somewhat inconvenient,
a lot of people have worked
around this in various ways,
and we're providing a full tool
about this that allows versioning of
the different models and the stores,
so we can detect which version of the
model was used to write out a store,
provide mapping rules
between the versions about
how you would use the model,
and then we can use the model to
create a new version of the model.
So we're going to talk
about the core data,
and we're going to talk
would like to upgrade between different
versions and a migration manager
to help run some of that process.
So the entities all now
have a version hash code,
which is basically sort
of a cryptographic hash.
And we record all the version
hashes used to write out a
store in the store's metadata.
And when you open up the store,
we'll make sure that
everything is in sync.
The mappings are pretty simple rules to
describe how to transform one version
of a store into another version.
So if you add an attribute,
do you want that new attribute
to have the default value?
Do you want the value to be
derived from existing data?
Stuff like that.
And there are a bunch of simple
transformation rules that we provide.
And then the Migration Manager is
basically a helper class to
help run the migration for you.
So it basically finds the new model
for a store and gives you some
customized callbacks and sort of
gets rid of some of the tedium here.
and Michael Sanchez will be giving a
session on the schema evolution feature.
And Miguel Sanchez will be giving
a session and go into a great deal
of detail about how to upgrade your
stores and make use of the versioning.
Another new feature is
the Atomic Store API,
and this allows you to write
your own custom backend.
Core Data will interact with your store,
and then we do the same stuff we
do on the frontend with the Manage
Objects and Manage Object Context.
This allows you to bring in legacy data
or write out data in a standardized file
format that Core Data couldn't annotate.
Core Data will interact with your store,
and then we do the same stuff
we do on the frontend with
the Manage Object Context.
and tomorrow at 2:00 PM in the
Optimizing Core Data application session,
Melissa Turner will talk more about
writing your own custom store.
So in the Managed Object context,
we've added some new API.
These are some fairly basic enhancements.
The first is a fast account
for fetch request method,
where you don't really
actually want any of the data,
but you'd like to know how many
objects would match that query.
So if you're doing a
summation field or something,
you don't need to fetch all the data just
to figure out how many match that query.
And also to help address part of the
problem and some of the tediousness
of working with temporary object IDs.
So if you have an object
that hasn't been saved yet,
but you still want that URL reference
to put it on the paste board,
we now have a method on the context
to obtain a permanent ID before
you actually save the object.
So that way when you do save the object,
its ID won't change,
you'll sort of pre-allocated
a permanent ID for it.
And this really makes it a lot easier
to do cross-door relationships.
And for the Fetch Request API,
we've added a bunch of
API to help tune performance.
In particular, you can decide now if
you just want object IDs,
you don't actually want
to fetch all the data,
you just want the identities
that match that query.
So you can do this to build up some sets,
and then you could intersect them or
do some other kind of manipulation.
You might pull them aside and
then fetch the data that match
those object IDs at a later time.
And then another important
optimization is prefetching.
So prefetching is the processing
of relationship key paths.
Like I said,
you don't want to do lots of small
fetches if you don't have to.
So if you're pulling up a window and you
know that you have a master detail view,
you might want to fetch
the detail information.
So that'll be off of the
master object's relationships.
And you can grab all of that
with one fetch by specifying
the key paths that you'd like
to bring back at the same time.
So that's a great way for improving
the responsiveness of the UI,
get exactly what the UI is showing.
And then the last thing I want
to talk about is the key path.
So if you're pulling up a window and you
know that you have a master detail view,
you might want to fetch
the detail information.
So that'll be off of the
master object's relationships.
And you can grab all of that
with one fetch by specifying
the key paths that you'd like
to bring back at the same time.
And there's some sundry additional
API on the fetch request.
There's a bunch of stuff that
Malcolm Crawford has very
kindly documented for us.
Prepopulating managed objects,
if you know that you don't really
want the faulting to go on,
and you can make the queries a little
more exclusive and not match subentities.
And we have some additional
notification keys and context to tell
you what objects have been refreshed
in the past event if you call refresh
object on it or the context does,
as well as what objects have been
invalidated if you call reset.
Then the manage objects themselves
have a few more callbacks.
The Persistent Store Coordinator has a
set URL method that you can use if you
decide to move a Persistent Store file
that's loaded in a coordinator.
You move it on the database.
You move it on the file system
out from underneath Core Data.
You can tell us where you've moved it to.
And also we're shipping now
as part of all the installs a
debug version of the framework.
So you can use the
DOLD image suffix export,
and you can get assertions in
your code as you're debugging.
And you can also turn on multi-threading
assertions where a coder will check to
make sure that the state that you've
put it in and you've put the context
and all the manage objects are in
are what we think ought to be done.
And these are obviously disabled in
the shipping version of the framework
because it's a little expensive to do.
But there's a whole separate
framework there for you.
And some related enhancements in
Foundation instead of Core Data are
the predicates and expressions
that Core Data is built on top of.
There's filtering on NSSet now
that matches the filtered
the array with predicate.
And we also have a subquery
expression for you.
There are custom function
expressions where you can say you
want to set up a predicate that's
using a function that you provide.
We have some set operations.
So you have predicates that can do
unions and intersects as part of a fetch.
And a fetch request expression that
Miguel will show a little more about
tomorrow in the modeling session that's
basically a predicate that performs
a fetch as part of the qualification.
So one of the things that I'm
most excited about are all of
the platform initiatives that
Mac OS X is doing in Leopard now.
I was very sad yesterday when it
took over 90 minutes to get to the
store to configure a new machine.
So part of that here,
and Core Data has participated in
some way and form in pretty much all
of the Leopard platform initiatives.
The first is, of course,
the universal transition to Intel,
and the transition to 64-bit
on both PowerPC and Intel.
So Core Data now is just built four ways,
and it's pretty easy for you to set up
your applications using Core Data to
ship on any of these architectures.
and going on right now as we speak
is a session on Objective-C 2.0.
They have a bunch of new language
features that are actually pretty cool.
So they're adding garbage
collection to Cocoa,
and that's opt-in so you
don't have to use it.
And then there's a fast
enumeration protocol,
so it lets you type a foreign syntax
that I'll show a little bit later.
And then Objective-C supporting
properties,
and Core Data, I'm afraid,
didn't quite get to that
in the Leopard Seed.
I will demo some of that in a bit.
But properties are some things
you see in some other languages,
and they're really a great way to
get type safe key paths in your code,
have the compiler check as opposed
to just the arbitrary strings.
and we spent a lot of time
working on performance and
scalability enhancements in Leopard.
On my trusty dual G5,
I was getting about a little over
20,000 rows per second on Tiger.
And on Leopard,
now in the seed that you have,
we're getting about
125,000 rows per second.
So we've made some small adjustments.
Thank you.
This is really only the beginning.
There are more performance enhancements
that have been throughout the
Leopard development cycle than
I can actually put on the slide here,
but there's tons of stuff.
Odds and ends, query short-circuiting,
improved caching,
improved memory management,
faster saving,
and we have a lot of additional
things that are right around the
corner in a future Leopard seed.
Now, you may ask why we
consider this so important,
and that's because the first
question that 92% of you ask
is-- and the other 8% of you ask
me if I have time for a question.
So--
So these reflect some
legitimate concerns.
I tend not to hear them from
people who have used Core Data,
but they are legitimate concerns
as people need to decide whether
or not they want to invest the
effort to adopt a new technology.
So I appreciate that.
Then there's this,
which is an interesting question.
It's perhaps better phrased
or rephrased as the,
well, Core Data is a new technology.
So I'm going to start with Core Data.
So Core Data is a new technology.
We came out in Tiger,
and all of you pretty much
had data before Tiger.
I mean,
Panther was not some great dark age.
You've all used persistence
solutions before.
Some of you have rolled your own.
Some of them are really fast.
And others of you have
reused other technologies,
maybe even been as simple as NS Coding.
But there are a lot of different
persistence solutions out there,
and adopting Core Data is
a transition for you.
Now, this is my favorite.
and David So this one I have
a little less sympathy for,
because I just don't see how
hand coding V tables with
Strixit function pointers is fun.
Objective-C is a tool.
It can be used well,
it can be used poorly,
it can be used for the wrong problem.
So now I'm going to provide
you a demonstration.
So we've run a little bit
longer than I expected,
but hopefully none of you have
to go anywhere too quickly.
So basically, I'm going to show three
different projects that are all
doing exactly the same thing.
They're fetching 500,000 words
from a dictionary of words.
And the words are actually
very trivial objects,
but they should help demonstrate how
well or not well Core Data manages all
the overhead that its features provide.
So the first project is something
that I see fairly indicative
of people who've decided that
Core Data and Objective-C are too slow.
Basically, as you can see here,
it's a .c.
We've dispensed with
Objective-C entirely.
And the key point here is, basically,
we have a generic dictionary
as our model object.
We don't have a formal schema.
We're just sort of throwing
things into it in key pairs.
And we're using core foundation
collections to handle the data.
And this is all, you know, I mean,
it's not necessarily pretty,
but it's all pretty straightforward.
We're using SQLite as directly.
Nothing much going on there.
And sometimes you see pretty
much the same thing in C++,
but with STL classes.
So I'm going to hint this a bit.
And we're going to have a
reproducible experiment.
So I'm going to run it a couple
times to warm everything up so
the future test apps run and
don't get an unfair advantage.
So basically we're fetching about 150,000
rows per second here with this pretty
basic SQLite code using Core Foundation.
And if we pop up terminal,
that was about 96 lines of code.
If you spent a great deal of time in
Shark and you spent a lot of bribes
on the Cocoa team and the kernel
team and all the other teams at
Apple to how to resolve every single
problem that you found in Shark,
you'd move along in the direction
that this app is going in.
So we come back to Objective-C because
we can get some things for free in here.
That's very nice.
And so the key point is we've
replaced the dictionary,
which is a very convenient
model object but not a really
high-performing model object,
with a real class that has scalars.
And we've done some serious
hacking on retain and release.
We've got these static functions,
which are basically Objective-C's
equivalent of a non-virtual method.
And otherwise, it's pretty much the same.
We've got some custom callbacks
now in the CF collection
classes that we're using.
Now we're running at over
200,000 rows per second.
It's about 40% faster than the
more obvious way of doing it.
and it's about a third more code,
so not so bad.
And then here for the Core Data example,
first I'll show you a model.
Now all the apps are using
exactly the same schema.
So we've got a very trivial word here.
Word's got a length,
it's got a first letter,
and it's got some word text.
One of the nice things about Word,
we have a Word class.
Now here we're showing some of
the new Objective-C properties.
So for Objective-C 2.0,
the properties allow a way for
Core Data to really tell the
compiler about the same kind of
things that the entity description
is telling Core Data about.
Properties are much more
generic than Core Data.
Objective-C is using them
for all kinds of things,
and they provide a really nice interface
to the access that the word object has,
or your object has.
And basically what ends up happening
is the compiler then infers the
existence of accessor methods.
So you don't have to declare all
the additional accessor methods.
You could if you wanted to,
but there's a text and a set text
method and a length and a set length.
And that's about it.
Now for Core Data objects...
Yeah, that's about all you need to do
to implement all those properties.
So one of the great things about this
is working with the Objective-C team,
we're now generating all the
accessor methods dynamically for you,
including the primitive accessor methods.
So you don't have to write any of
the calls to primitive key value
coding that you might have before.
If you want to write a
custom accessor method,
then you can call, in this case,
you could call primitive length,
and Core Data will infer the
existence of that method and will
specialize them at runtime to
be exactly what the entity needs.
We'll optimize them.
They're great,
and they're actually quite a bit faster
than doing the key value coding through
the original Tiger Core Data templates.
So...
Take a quick look at the
main body of this sample.
It's pretty straightforward.
We're creating a core data stack--
the same thing you can get from
any of the template projects here.
We create a fetch request.
So here's some of our new API to
turn off some of the faulting,
because we know we're going to iterate
through every element of the result set.
And we set a fetch limit,
which is the same that the SQL was
written for in the other examples.
And we execute the fetch.
And then here,
we see the new faster enumeration
syntax in Objective-C,
which is quite a bit faster
for iterating through any of
the Cocoa Collection classes.
Something I neglected to show you
is the advanced SQLite project that
I just showed you is also using that.
So you can use them bridged.
Pretty nice.
And here is the new property syntax.
So like I mentioned,
this is type safe compiler
check key paths for you.
A lot of people have asked for
this feature for a long time.
It's really nice.
If words were more complicated,
you could follow relationships further.
Now, if you decide that you
don't like this syntax,
because you're more of an
Objective-C traditionalist,
you can do this.
You don't have to change any
other part of the project.
These accessors will
be generated for you.
So that all works.
[Transcript missing]
We're getting close to
500,000 rows per second.
If this were built a
little bit differently,
it might actually break that,
but pretty close.
And we'll throw in the header file too.
We're getting close to
500,000 rows per second.
If this were built a
little bit differently,
it might actually break that,
but pretty close.
So if we can cut back to the slides.
Great.
Yes, no whammy.
All right.
So.
Over 800,000 lines of, sorry,
800,000 rows per second
on the new hotness.
The exact, exact same code.
So, it's been fun.
So now one of the things about this is
I don't mean to say that Core Data is
some magic silver bullet that you
should use for all your problems.
Rather,
this is a demonstration that we're
really serious about delivering
high-performance solutions to you.
And forthcoming and future leper seeds,
you'll be able to get a hold of a
version of Core Data that supports
the Objective-C app property syntax,
and has a dynamic method generation,
and is scalable across the architectures.
As you might have imagined,
there's quite a bit going on
there behind the scenes to
get that 2x speed improvement.
So one of the things that Core Data is
providing is this scalability,
where regardless of what
machines your customer is using,
if they're on a mini with a core solo,
a dual core MacBook,
or one of the new hotnesses,
or they're like me and they're
on a little older power PC,
Core Data is going to be managing
the data as efficiently as possible.
that hardware.
So, just to wrap up,
I hope that you learned that
most of the applications on the
system can benefit from Core Data.
Even if you're something like
mail and you already have your
own core persistency solution,
you might do some new features,
some preferences, something like that.
It's model-driven, really easy to use,
powerful object graph features,
and we have lots of new stuff in Leopard.
We've shown you some.
The custom stores we'll
talk about more tomorrow.
The schema migration is
tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.
And Core Data is participating
in all of these Leopard platform
initiatives that Core Data apps
can pretty much get for free.
A parting request from us to you:
help us help you, please.
We love great feedback.
Please read the documentation.
Knock on Croft has done a fabulous job.
I personally think it's the
best documentation for Cocoa.
There, you know, throw down the gauntlet.
Please use bugreport.apple.com.
It really helps us a lot to
know what parts of the framework
are most important to you,
where we need to add
a little more polish,
what performance improvements
we should do first,
stuff like that.
If you have a performance issue,
please include a shark trace.
Shark's really easy to use and provides
us some really valuable feedback.
If you have a bug and you include a
very small sample application that we
can click run and it shows us our bug,
that's great.
Let me tell you that
I fix those bugs first.
If someone sends me a sample app,
they have my attention.
So for more information,
Derek Horan is the
Application Framework Evangelist,
and you can find all the good
stuff in the usual places.